doc: dev_process: Add description about GH labels usage (#15054)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/development_process/gh_labels.rst

.. _gh_labels:

Labeling issues and pull requests in GitHub
###########################################

Lots of GitHub issues and pull requests are being created daily.
To help us manage them we have “labels”:
to classify them by area, type, priority, or to mark them in need of attention.

All GitHub issues or pull requests must be appropriately labeled.
When reviewing a PR, if it has missing or incorrect labels, maintainers shall

> fix it.

Reviewer: Maybe add:
```
Issues and PRs often have multiple labels assigned,
to help classify them in the different available categories.
```

This saves us all time when searching, reduces the chances of the PR or issue
being forgotten, speeds up reviewing, reduces the changes of duplicates, etc.

These are the labels we currently have, grouped by type:

Area:
*****

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``area:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    Indicates which areas are affected by the bug or pull request
=============  ===============================================================

> An area maintainer should be able to filter by his area and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An area maintainer should be able to filter by an area label and
```

To be discussed in a meeting
****************************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``API``, ``dev-review``, ``TSC``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    The issue is to be discussed in the following API/dev-review/TSC
               meeting if time permits.
=============  ===============================================================

Minimum PR review time
**********************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Hot Fix``, ``Trivial PR``, ``Maintainer``,
               ``Security Review``, ``TSC``
Applicable to  PRs only
Description    Depending on the PR complexity, an indication of how long a merge
               should be held to ensure proper review. See
               :ref:`review process <review_time>`
=============  ===============================================================

Issue priority labels
*********************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``priority:{high|medium|low}``
Applicable to  Issues only

> Description    To classify the priority/importance of a bug or feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description    To classify the impact and importance of a bug or feature
```

=============  ===============================================================

> Note: Issue priorities are decided/changed during the bug-triage or TSC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Issue priorities are generally set or changed during the issue triage or TSC.
```

Author: I take the 1st change. About the 2nd, the meeting invite actually calls it "Bug Triage & Release Readiness", so I was trying to be consistent with that.

meetings.

Miscellaneous labels
********************

For both PRs and issues
=======================

+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|``Bug``            | The issue is a bug, or the PR is fixing a bug            |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|``Coverity``       |A Coverity detected issue or its fix                      |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

> |Waiting for        | The Zephyr developers are waiting for the submitter to   |

Reviewer: This label is currently called ``waiting for response``.  This name should also be enclosed in backticks to be formatted like all the others in this table.

|``RFC``            |The author would like input from the community. For a PR  |
|                   |it should be considered a draft                           |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|``LTS``            |Long term release branch related                          |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|``In progress``    |For PRs: is work in progress and should not be merged yet.|
|                   |For issues: Is being worked on                            |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|``EXT``            | Related to an external component (in ``ext/``)           |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

PR only labels
==============

================ ===============================================================
``DNM``          This PR should not be merged (Do Not Merge).
                 For work in progress, GitHub "draft" PRs are preferred
``Stale PR``     PR which seems abandoned, and requires attention by the author
``Blocked``      Blocked by another PR or issue

> ``needs review`` The PR needs attention from the maintainers

Reviewer: Is this an opportunity to have all labels with a consistent upper-case first letter?

Author: I can certainly fix that :)

``Backport``     The PR is a backport or should be backported
``Licensing``    The PR has licensing issues which require a licensing expert to
                 review it
================ ===============================================================

Issue only labels
=================

==================== ===========================================================

> ``Regression``       Something, which was working, does not anymore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Regression``       Something, which was working, but does not anymore
```

                     (bug subtype)

> ``question``         This issue is a question to the Zephyr developers

Reviewer: A consistent first upper-case letter would be good...

Also, are we encouraging folks to ask questions as GitHub issues, or asking them to post questions in Slack?

Author: >A consistent first upper-case letter would be good..

Sure

> Also, are we encouraging folks to ask questions as GitHub issues, or asking them to post questions in Slack?

Well that is another thing. The fact is that today, people comes to both places with questions, and some issues are morphed into questions.

.. _gh_labels:

Labeling issues and pull requests in GitHub
###########################################

Lots of GitHub issues and pull requests are being created daily.
To help us manage them we have “labels”:
to classify them by area, type, priority, or to mark them in need of attention.

All GitHub issues or pull requests must be appropriately labeled.
Issues and PRs often have multiple labels assigned,
to help classify them in the different available categories.
When reviewing a PR, if it has missing or incorrect labels, maintainers shall
fix it.

This saves us all time when searching, reduces the chances of the PR or issue
being forgotten, speeds up reviewing, reduces the changes of duplicates, etc.

These are the labels we currently have, grouped by type:

Area:
*****

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Area:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues

> Description    Indicates which areas are affected by the bug or pull request

Reviewer: I thought I had added a comment about this, but doesn't look like I saved it.  Instead of using the word "area" to define what an "area" is, how about something like:
```
Indicates subsystems (e.g., Kernel, I2C, Memory Management),
project functions (e.g., Debugging, Documentation, Process), or other
categories (e.g., Coding Style, MISRA-C)  affected by the bug or pull request.
```

Author: Done :)

Area:
*****

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Area:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    Indicates subsystems (e.g., Kernel, I2C, Memory Management),
               project functions (e.g., Debugging, Documentation, Process),
               or other categories (e.g., Coding Style, MISRA-C)  affected by
               the bug or pull request.
=============  ===============================================================

An area maintainer should be able to filter by an area label and
find all issues and PRs which relate to that area.

Platform
*********

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Platform:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    An issue or PR which affects only a particular platform
=============  ===============================================================

To be discussed in a meeting
****************************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``API``, ``dev-review``, ``TSC``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues

> Description    The issue is to be discussed in the following API/dev-review/TSC

Reviewer 2: Can you link to the GitHub Wiki pages where those meetings are described?

               meeting if time permits.
=============  ===============================================================

Minimum PR review time
**********************

=============  ===============================================================

> Labels         ``Hot Fix``, ``Trivial PR``, ``Maintainer``,

Reviewer 2: isn't the labe "Trivial" and not "Trivial PR"?

Author: The plan was to rename Trivial => "Trivial PR" (To avoid developers assigning it to trivial bugs.

Reviewer 2: Does it matter if we reuse the label for bugs and PRs?

Author: If there is any purpose of using a "Trivial" label in a bug then we could use it. Today, I don't see any need for such.
But having too many labels with no clear purpose will add to the confusion (which we are trying to reduce with this PR)

               ``Security Review``, ``TSC``
Applicable to  PRs only
Description    Depending on the PR complexity, an indication of how long a merge
               should be held to ensure proper review. See
               :ref:`review process <review_time>`
=============  ===============================================================

Issue priority labels
*********************

=============  ===============================================================

> Labels         ``priority:{high|medium|low}``

Reviewer 2: Is there somewhere with more information about what those categories mean? For example in the development process we should have how many of those we area allowed to have open before release

Author: Not that I'm aware. But yes, I agree it is important to clarify it. As soon as we would, it should be linked from here.

Reviewer 2: I thought we did, strange. @nashif ?

Reviewer 3: Not sure this is documented anywhere beside TSC meeting minutes. Need to add.

+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``In progress``         | For PRs: is work in progress and should not be      |
|                        | merged yet. For issues: Is being worked on          |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``EXT``                 | Related to an external component (in ``ext/``)      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

PR only labels
==============

================ ===============================================================
``DNM``          This PR should not be merged (Do Not Merge).
                 For work in progress, GitHub "draft" PRs are preferred
``Stale PR``     PR which seems abandoned, and requires attention by the author
``Blocked``      Blocked by another PR or issue
``needs review`` The PR needs attention from the maintainers
``Backport``     The PR is a backport or should be backported
``Licensing``    The PR has licensing issues which require a licensing expert to
                 review it
================ ===============================================================

Issue only labels

> =================

Reviewer 2: I think it's important to note that an issue needs to have one of the 4 following labels:

- Bug
- Question
- Enhancement
- Feature Request

Reviewer 4: The only way to make that clear and simple is for them to share a common prefix, I suggest: `Type: bug`, `Type: Question`,... This will also group them in the list.

.. _gh_labels:

Labeling issues and pull requests in GitHub
###########################################

Lots of GitHub issues and pull requests are being created daily.

> To help us manage them we have “labels”:

Reviewer 5: nit: this colon (":") seems like it should be removed

Author: would a semicolon seem better?

Reviewer 5: I don't think so. A semicolon would mean "to classify them by area, type, [...] attention" is an independent clause, which it is not (https://www.proofreadnow.com/blog/bid/71799/The-Semicolon-and-Independent-Clauses).

I don't think any punctuation marks are needed (or appropriate)

Author: Thanks, done

to classify them by area, type, priority, or to mark them in need of attention.

All GitHub issues or pull requests must be appropriately labeled.
Issues and PRs often have multiple labels assigned,
to help classify them in the different available categories.
When reviewing a PR, if it has missing or incorrect labels, maintainers shall
fix it.

This saves us all time when searching, reduces the chances of the PR or issue

> being forgotten, speeds up reviewing, reduces the changes of duplicates, etc.

Reviewer 5: I'm having a little trouble understanding what "reduces the changes of duplicates" means -- do you think you can clarify this?

Author: would it be enough to say "reduces the changes of duplicate issue reports"?
(it is just a quick motivational paragraph, I would not it want to become too long)

Reviewer 5: OK, so this is about avoiding dupes? How about "avoids duplicate issue reports"?

Issue priority labels
*********************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``priority:{high|medium|low}``
Applicable to  Issues only
Description    To classify the impact and importance of a bug or feature
=============  ===============================================================

Note: Issue priorities are generally set or changed during the bug-triage or TSC
meetings.

Miscellaneous labels
********************

For both PRs and issues
=======================

+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``Bug``                 | The issue is a bug, or the PR is fixing a bug       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``Coverity``            | A Coverity detected issue or its fix                |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``Waiting for response``| The Zephyr developers are waiting for the submitter |
|                        | to respond to a question, or address an issue.      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

> |``RFC``                 | The author would like input from the community. For |

Reviewer 5: Should we consider deprecating this label in favor of using draft pull requests only? https://github.blog/2019-02-14-introducing-draft-pull-requests/

I see below that `This PR should not be merged (Do Not Merge).  For work in progress, GitHub "draft" PRs are preferred"` is listed next to DNM. I also see `In progress` is a label which can apply to PRs that seems very similar.

As a reader, I'm a bit confused between the following labels for pull requests, which all seem to be related:

 - RFC
- In progress
- DNM
- GitHub "Draft" PRs

Is there an opportunity to consolidate these into just one label (or perhaps just use draft PRs)?

Author: Maybe, but not trivially right now.
(Note that I'm not trying to fix all issues related to our way of working with this PR)
I'm hoping to start by document what we have, and at the same time, clean what is trivial to clean.
If we start by going further in this same PR it will just balloon out of proportion.
=> If you don't mind, let's take that discussion separately from this PR.

Reviewer 5: Sure

> .. _gh_labels:

Reviewer 3: can this document be integrated into the existing issues document as a sub-section?

Author: Today that mini-page content is a bit disconnected from this one (I guess you meant issues.rst ?)
You have a PR editing that one.. So after this is merged, feel free to take this content in if you feel it fits better there.

being forgotten, speeds up reviewing, avoids duplicate issue reports, etc.

These are the labels we currently have, grouped by type:

Area:
*****

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Area:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    Indicates subsystems (e.g., Kernel, I2C, Memory Management),
               project functions (e.g., Debugging, Documentation, Process),
               or other categories (e.g., Coding Style, MISRA-C)  affected by
               the bug or pull request.
=============  ===============================================================

An area maintainer should be able to filter by an area label and
find all issues and PRs which relate to that area.

Platform
*********

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Platform:*``
Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    An issue or PR which affects only a particular platform
=============  ===============================================================

To be discussed in a meeting
****************************

=============  ===============================================================

> Labels         ``API``, ``dev-review``, ``TSC``

Author: @carlescufi: Should we separate the API label into a "area: API", and "API (meeting)", to clear a bit things?

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's necessary. API is API, we can go through everything marked as API during the meeting

Author: My thinking was that such a label can both help you to filter, but also the author of the PR, to know the PR is going to be discussed there.

> Labels         ``API``, ``dev-review``, ``TSC``

Reviewer: There's an organized person in me that would like to have all labels with a prefix (e.g., ``area: API``, ``meetings: API``) so that the labels are grouped together (``meetings: API``, ``meetings: Dev-review``, ``meetings: TSC``), otherwise they don't sort together.

Author: I agree :)

Author: Would it be reasonable to, by now, have this PR start as documentation of what there actually is, and then open an issue with this different fixes? (and have them applied once agreed in a a following PR). I just don't want this PR to drag long.

Reviewer: OK.  Maybe you can create an issue to track this (adding a prefix to all labels).

Reviewer 3: dont like the meeting prefix, it does not have to be meeting, this is something that can always be brought into discussion, on slack, in email and other places.

Reviewer: maybe ``review:`` then?

Applicable to  PRs  and issues
Description    The issue is to be discussed in the following
               `API/dev-review/TSC meeting`_ if time permits
=============  ===============================================================

.. _`API/dev-review/TSC meeting`: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/wiki/Zephyr-Committee-and-Working-Group-Meetings

Minimum PR review time
**********************

=============  ===============================================================
Labels         ``Hot Fix``, ``Trivial PR``, ``Maintainer``,

>                ``Security Review``, ``TSC``

Reviewer: Is this the same ``TSC`` mentioned above?  If it's different, then a prefix would clarify :)

Author: Today it is the same, I would be happy to split it in two, but Anas was not too keen on it.

|``RFC``                 | The author would like input from the community. For |
|                        | a PR it should be considered a draft                |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``LTS``                 | Long term release branch related                    |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``In progress``         | For PRs: is work in progress and should not be      |
|                        | merged yet. For issues: Is being worked on          |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|``EXT``                 | Related to an external component (in ``ext/``)      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

PR only labels
==============

================ ===============================================================
``DNM``          This PR should not be merged (Do Not Merge).
                 For work in progress, GitHub "draft" PRs are preferred
``Stale PR``     PR which seems abandoned, and requires attention by the author

> ``Blocked``      Blocked by another PR or issue

Reviewer 3: And issue can block another issue, so this applies to more than just PRs

Author: correct, moved
